>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, MAY 17:
ISIS GAINS CONTROL OF THE CITY
OF RAMADI.
NEW DETAILS ON THE INVESTIGATION
OF THE AMTRAK TRAIN CRASH THAT
KILLED EIGHT PEOPLE.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
FUNDING CUTS AND INCREASED
COMPETITION MAY BE LIMITING
SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY IN THE
UNITED STATES.
>> WE'RE LEAVING HALF OF THE
GREAT SCIENCE ON THE TABLE
THAT'S COMING TO US NOW BECAUSE
WE CAN'T FIND THE FUNDS FOR IT.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
WE BEGIN WITH LATE BREAKING
DEVELOPMENTS IN THE MIDDLE EAST.
ISIS FIGHTERS HAVE TAKEN CONTROL
OF RAMADI AND IRAQI FORCES HAVE
FLED.
A SPOKESMAN FOR THE GOVERNOR OF
ANBAR PROVINCE SAYS, "THE CITY
HAS FALLEN."
RAMADI IS NOW THE FIRST MAJOR
URBAN CENTER SEIZED BY
INSURGENTS IN IRAQ SINCE ISIS
LAUNCHED ATTACKS THERE LAST
YEAR, THIS DESPITE CONTINUOUS
AIR STRIKES BY THE U.S. AND ITS
ALLIES.
THE BATTLE REPORTEDLY CLAIMED
THE LIVES OF SOME 500 CIVILIANS
AND SOLDIERS JUST IN THE PAST
TWO DAYS.
MEANWHILE IN SYRIA, OFFICIALS
SAY ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS
HAVE BEEN PUSHED BACK FROM THE
SITE OF ANCIENT RUINS IN
PALMYRA.
NEARLY 300 PEOPLE HAVE
REPORTEDLY DIED IN THE PAST FOUR
DAYS OF FIGHTING TO PROTECT THE
WORLD HERITAGE SITE.
FOR THE LATEST ON THE EVENT FROM
RAMADI, WE ARE JOINED BY NOUR
MALAS OF THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL."
>> ANOTHER MAJOR IRAQI CITY IN
THE HANDS OF THE ISLAMIC STATE,
NOW RAMADI IS THE CAPITAL OF
IRAQ'S LARGEST PROVINCE.
ALSO A HUGE SETBACK FOR A
GOVERNMENT CAMPAIGN LAUNCHED
LAST MONTH, TO RECLAIM ANBAR
PROVINCE, WHICH IS REALLY IRAQ'S
SUNNI HEARTLAND.
IT IS A HUGE PROVINCE BORDERING
BAGHDAD, BORDERS SAUDI ARABIA
JORDAN AND SYRIA AS WELL.
WE GOT URGENT REPORTS FROM
POLICE MEMBERS FLEEING TODAY AS
ISLAMIC STATE TOOK CHARGE,
AN OPERATIONS COMMAND CENTER.
SOME OF THE PEOPLE WE WERE
TALKING TO SAID THEY WERE
STEPPING OVER BODIES AS THEY
FLED.
MANY ENDED UP IN THE HANDS OF
ISLAMIC STATE, VEHICLES,
WEAPONS, AS THEY STAMPEDED THE
LAST GOVERNMENT STRONGHOLD IN
RAMADI.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE CONCERN
THAT IT ANSWER GOING TO TAKE
IRANIAN BACKED MILITIA TO FACE
ISLAMIC STATE?
>> AS RAMADI WAS FALLING TODAY,
CALLED THE MOSTLY SHIA
PARAMILITARY FORCES.
A MAJOR, MOST LI SUNNI AND THERE
ARE CONCERNS OVER CALLING IN
SHIITE FORCES TO TAKE PART IN
THE FIGHT.
IT'S ALSO THE GOVERNMENT HAS
BEEN TRYING TO PROVE THAT IT CAN
CARRY OUT THIS FIGHT WITH
REGULAR FORCES ON ITS OWN.
>> ALL RIGHT, NOUR MALAS THANKS
SO MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW TO THE
INVESTIGATION INTO WHAT CAUSED
THAT DEADLY AMTRAK DERAILMENT
TUESDAY.
THE F.B.I. WAS CALLED IN TO
FIGURE OUT WHETHER SOME KIND OF
PROJECTILE HIT THE LEFT
WINDSHIELD JUST BEFORE THE TRAIN
JUMPED THE TRACKS.
BUT THIS MORNING, THE HEAD OF
THE N.T.S.B. SAID OFFICIALS HAVE
FOUND NO RADIO COMMUNICATIONS
INDICATING ANYTHING STRUCK THE
TRAIN.
THE TRAIN WAS TRAVELLING 106
MILES PER HOUR WHEN IT CRASHED.
NOW AN AMTRAK SPOKESMAN SAYS THE
COMPANY IS WORKING TO COMPLY
WITH AN EMERGENCY ORDER TO
INSTALL COMPUTERIZED SPEED
RESTRICTION SYSTEMS ON ALL
NORTHEAST CORRIDOR TRAINS.
BUT THAT COULD TAKE UNTIL THE
END OF THIS YEAR.
THIS MORNING, NEW JERSEY SENATOR
CORY BOOKER TOLD NBC'S "MEET THE
PRESS" THAT THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT HAS FAILED TO FUND
THOSE COMPUTERIZED SYSTEMS FOR
YEARS.
>> WE HAVE TRILLIONS OF DOLLARS
OF AN INFRASTRUCTURE DEBT RIGHT
NOW AND THE ACCIDENT WHICH WE
SAW HAPPEN WHICH THE N.T.S.B.
SAYS COULD HAVE BEEN PREVENTED
SHOULD WE HAVE HAD POSITIVE
TRAIN CONTROL WE SHOULD NOT BE
SCRIMPING ON INVESTMENTS IN
PUBLIC SAFETY.
>> Sreenivasan: THE N.T.S.B.'S
LEAD INVESTIGATOR SAID TODAY
THAT INWARD FACING VIDEO CAMERAS
WOULD HAVE HELPED WITH THE
INVESTIGATION.
AMTRAK HOPES TO RESUME LIMITED
SERVICE BETWEEN PHILADELPHIA AND
NEW YORK TOMORROW, THEN GO BACK
TO FULL SERVICE TUESDAY.
OVERSEAS, SECRETARY OF STATE
JOHN KERRY IS IN SOUTH KOREA,
PREPARING FOR A MEETING TOMORROW
WITH TOP OFFICIALS.
KERRY'S VISIT COMES AFTER NORTH
KOREA CLAIMED ONE OF ITS
SUBMARINES SUCCESSFULLY TEST-
FIRED A BALLISTIC MISSILE FROM A
SUBMARINE EARLIER THIS MONTH.
KERRY PLANS TO REITERATE
AMERICA'S COMMITMENT TO SOUTH
KOREA'S SECURITY.
HE'LL ALSO DISCUSS CYBER
SECURITY.
AND IN JAPAN, ABOUT 35,000
PEOPLE RALLIED TODAY AT A
BALLPARK IN NAHA, DEMANDING THAT
THE U.S. NOT ONLY SCRAP PLANS TO
RELOCATE ITS EXISTING AIRBASE ON
OKINAWA, BUT TO GET RID OF IT
ALTOGETHER.
TODAY'S DEMONSTRATION IS THE
LATEST DEVELOPMENT IN A NEARLY
TWO-DECADE LONG FIGHT BETWEEN
RESIDENTS ON ONE SIDE, AND THE
U.S. AND JAPANESE GOVERNMENTS ON
THE OTHER.
MORE THAN HALF OF THE 47,000
U.S. TROOPS IN JAPAN ARE
STATIONED IN OKINAWA.
OKINAWA'S GOVERNOR JOINED THE
PROTESTS TODAY, BUT JAPAN'S
PRIME MINISTER CONTINUES TO PUSH
FOR THE NEW BASE TO BE BUILT.
FOR THE FIRST TIME IN MODERN
HISTORY, TWO PALESTINIANS HAVE
BECOME CATHOLIC SAINTS.
POPE FRANCIS CANONIZED TWO 19th
CENTURY NUNS IN A CROWDED ST.
PETER'S SQUARE THIS MORNING.
PALESTINIAN PRESIDENT MAHMOUD
ABBAS ATTENDED THE CEREMONY.
YESTERDAY, THE POPE MET
PRIVATELY WITH ABBAS, CALLING
HIM, "AN ANGEL OF PEACE."
IN HAWAII, ONE OF THE WORLD'S
MOST ACTIVE VOLCANOES COULD BE
ON THE VERGE OF ANOTHER
ERUPTION.
SCIENTISTS HAVE RECORDED AS MANY
AS 25 QUAKES PER HOUR ON THE
SLOPES OF MOUNT KILAUEA.
RESEARCHERS SAY THE LAVA COULD
ERUPT ON THE VOLCANO'S SOUTHWEST
SIDE.
IF SO, THAT WOULD NOT POSE A
THREAT TO THE POPULATION.
THE SO-CALLED "MOTHER OF LAMAZE"
HAS DIED AT THE AGE OF 100.
ELISABETH BING REVOLUTIONIZED
CHILDBIRTH IN THE 1960'S BY
TEACHING MOMS TO USE RELAXATION
AND BREATHING TECHNIQUES INSTEAD
OF GETTING ANESTHETIZED DURING
LABOR.
OVER HER MORE THAN 50 YEAR
CAREER, BING LECTURED, APPEARED
ON TALK SHOWS AND TAUGHT CLASSES
ON NATURAL CHILDBIRTH METHODS
FIRST DEVELOPED BY DR. FERNAND
LAMAZE.
BING'S INFLUENCE LIVES ON.
AN ESTIMATED 25% OF ALL AMERICAN
PARENTS TO BE ATTEND LAMAZE
CLASSES EVERY YEAR.
IN SOUTHEAST ASIA, MALAYSIA IS
LAUNCHING EMERGENCY, HIGH-LEVEL
TALKS WITH ITS NEIGHBORS TODAY,
HOPING TO ADDRESS THE GROWING
HUMANITARIAN CRISIS OFF ITS
COAST.
MORE THAN 5,000 REFUGEES HAVE
BEEN STRANDED AT SEA, SOME FOR
WEEKS, AS THEY TRY TO ESCAPE
ETHNIC PERSECUTION AND POVERTY
IN MYANMAR AND BANGLADESH.
NONE OF THE NEIGHBORING
COUNTRIES ARE WELCOMING THE
REFUGEES.
FOOD SUPPLIES ARE DWINDLING AND
FIGHTS ARE BREAKING OUT ON BOARD
THESE VESSELS.
I'M JOINED NOW VIA SKYPE FROM
THAILAND BY AUBREY BELFORD OF
REUTERS WITH THE LATEST.
BEEN FOLLOWING NOT JUST THE
STORY IN THIS COUNTRY BUT IN
OTHER COUNTRIES AS WELL.
WHAT'S HAPPENING TO THESE
PEOPLE, HOW LONG ARE THEY OUT AT
SEA?
>> WHAT WE HAVE BEEN HEARING IS
PEOPLE HAVE BEEN OUT AT SEA FOR
AS LONG AS THREE MONTHS.
THE U.N. HCR SAYS THE EXODUS OF
THE STATE IN MYANMAR
WHICH IS WHERE THE ROHINGYA
PEOPLE COME FROM, THE USUAL
ROUTE IS TO COME THROUGH
THAILAND.
USING HUMAN TRAFFICKERS WHO THEN
HOLD THEM IN CAMPS IN THE JUNGLE
FOR RANSOM UNTIL SOMEONE CAN PAY
TO GET THEM OUT, TO PAY FOR
THEIR VOYAGE.
YOU KNOW THEY GO ON THESE
VOYAGES, NO MONEY DOWN.
THERE HAS BEEN DOCUMENTED
MURDERS, RAPES, TORTURES IN
THESE CAMPS.
WHAT THE THAI GOVERNMENTAL DID
WAS -- GOVERNMENT DID WAS ARREST
A MAJOR TRAFFICKER AS WELL AS
THAI OFFICIALS THAT WERE
IMPLICATED IN THIS.
FOR THOUSANDS WAITING AT SEA OFF
THE THAI COAST UNTIL IT'S SAFE
TO COME INTO LAND AND COME INTO
THESE CAMPS AND THEN TRANSFER
ACROSS THE BEARD TO MALAYSIA.
THEY HAVE NOWHERE TO GO.
WHAT'S HAPPENED NOW IS CHAOS ON
THE SEA, YOU'VE HAD BOAT LOADS
OF PEOPLE ABANDONED AND NOWHERE
TO GO AND NO ONE TO TAKE THEM.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU'VE BEEN
FOLLOWING THIS FOR THE LAST
COUPLE EVER DAYS, WHAT'S THAT
BEEN LIKE?
>> WE SUDDENLY GOT DESPERATE
CALLS FROM THIS BOAT THAT WAS
STRANDED.
NORTH IN THAILAND, FLOATING OUT
OF THE BORDERS IN THE AREA I AM
RIGHT NOW, BEAUTIFUL RESORT
ISLAND, REALLY POPULAR WITH
TOURISTS.
THEY WERE FLOATING AT SEA, HAVE
BEEN FOUND SINCE BASICALLY
KNOCKED BACK AND FORTH BETWEEN
THE THAI AND MALAYSIAN VESSELS.
TODAY, THEY WERE TOWED OUT WEST
TOWARDS INDONESIA AND WE
HAVEN'T HEARD MORE ABOUT THEM.
>> Sreenivasan: THE THAI
GOVERNMENT TOWED THIS BOAT BACK
OUT TO SEA?
>> THEY SAID THEY WANTED TO GO
TO MALAYSIA.
THE STORY IS A LITTLE MORE
MURKY.
THE BOATS ARE UNDER THE
GOVERNMENT CONTROL, THE THAI
PEOPLE WHO ARE RUNNING THESE
BOATS WANT TO GO TO WHERE THEIR
BOSSES ARE, THE PEOPLE ON BOARD
WANT TO LIVE.
WE TOOK A SPEEDBOAT OUT, SAW
THIS SAW THE THAI NAVY PULLING
THEM BACK TO INDONESIA.
THEY ARE INTERCEPTED BY
THE MALAYSIANS, SAW THE BOAT
BACK AGAIN ON THE THAI SIDE.
YOU CAN SEE BOTH SIDES OF THE
PING PONG TABLE.
>> Sreenivasan: IN A COUPLE OF
WEEKS IN THE MEANTIME WE STILL
HAVE THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE ON
THESE BOATS.
>> YES.
AND THESE DESPERATE SITUATIONS.
WITH YOU PULL UP YOU KNOW WHEN
WE PULL UP BESIDE THIS BOAT
YESTERDAY, YOU CAN SEE THERE'S
SERIOUS MALNUTRITION AMONGST
PEOPLE ON BOARD.
WE HAVE BEEN REPORTING BEFORE
THE CRISIS BLEW UP AND
CONDITIONS ARE EXTREMELY BAD.
PEOPLE DIE REGULARLY ON THESE
BOATS AND ARE DUMPED OVERBOARD
BECAUSE KEEP IN MIND THEY'RE AT
SEA FOR MONTHS IN MANY CASES.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE A
POSSIBLE PLAN THAT THE
GOVERNMENTS CAN COME UP WITH
IN THE NEXT COUPLE OF WEEKS?
>> THEY'RE BEING URGED BY A LOT
OF INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
TO SIMPLY TAKE THESE PEOPLE IN.
I DON'T KNOW AND I HAVEN'T HEARD
EXACTLY WHAT ANY FORM AND
AGREEMENT WOULD TAKE, I THINK
THAT REALLY REMAINS TO BE SEEN.
>> Sreenivasan: AUBREY BELFORD
FROM REUTERS, JOINING US BY
SKYPE, THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
THE UNITED STATES IS AMONG THE
WORLD'S LEADERS IN BIOMEDICAL
RESEARCH, THANKS IN LARGE PART
TO THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, WHICH
SUPPORTS HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
OF SCIENTISTS WITH GRANTS.
BUT FOR MORE THAN A DECADE,
FEDERAL FUNDING FOR BIOMEDICAL
RESEARCH HAS BEEN DECLINING.
SOME SAY THE TREND THREATENS NOT
ONLY THE CAREERS OF PROMISING
SCIENTISTS AND AMERICA'S
PREEMINENT ROLE IN SCIENCE
RESEARCH, BUT MAY ALSO LIMIT
FUTURE SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERIES.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT KARLA
MURTHY REPORTS FROM NEW
BRUNSWICK, NEW JERSEY.
>> Reporter: LOREDANA QUADRO
LEFT ITALY 19 YEARS AGO TO
PURSUE A CAREER IN SCIENCE HERE
IN THE U.S.
>> THE UNITED STATES WAS ALWAYS
SEEN AS THE PLACE TO BE A
SCIENTIST BECAUSE THERE WERE A
LOTS OF OPPORTUNITIES.
>> Reporter: SO WAS IT YOUR
DREAM TO, YOU KNOW, ONE DAY HAVE
YOUR OWN LAB?
>> OF COURSE.
OF COURSE.
>> Reporter: QUADRO HAS NOW BEEN
RUNNING HER OWN LAB AT RUTGERS
UNIVERSITY IN NEW JERSEY FOR
ALMOST 10 YEARS.
AND SHE'S BUILT HER CAREER ON
ANSWERING A VERY SPECIFIC
QUESTION: HOW VITAMIN A IS
ABSORBED BY EMBRYOS AND
UNDERSTANDING THAT BASIC
FUNCTION COULD ULTIMATELY HELP
PREVENT BIRTH DEFECTS.
>> WHEN YOU ACTUALLY UNDERSTAND
OR THINK YOU MIGHT HAVE
UNDERSTOOD A LITTLE TINY THING
THAT IS GOING ON INTO A CELL.
IT'S REALLY REWARDING.
>> Reporter: BUT NOW, ALL OF HER
YEARS OF WORK IS IN JEOPARDY.
LIKE MANY SCIENTISTS WORKING AT
A UNIVERSITY, SHE DEPENDS ON
GRANTS FROM THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT TO RUN HER LAB.
THEY PAY FOR EVERYTHING FROM
SUPPLIES TO HER TEAM OF
RESEARCHERS.
IF QUADRO DOESN'T GET A NEW
GRANT BY JULY, SHE'LL BE OUT OF
MONEY.
SO YOU'RE IN DANGER OF LOSING
YOUR LAB.
>> YES.
>> Reporter: THE NATIONAL
INSTITUTES OF HEALTH, THE
N.I.H., IS THE SINGLE LARGEST
FUNDER OF BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH IN
THE WORLD.
BUT OVER THE LAST 13 YEARS, THE
N.I.H. BUDGET HAS ACTUALLY
DECLINED MORE THAN 22% IN TERMS
OF PURCHASING POWER.
AND TIGHTER BUDGETS HAVE MEANT
THAT GETTING ONE OF THESE
COVETED GRANTS IS EVEN MORE
DIFFICULT.
IN THE PAST, A THIRD OF ALL
GRANTS SUBMITTED WERE FUNDED.
TODAY IT'S ABOUT A SIXTH OF ALL
GRANTS.
AND MANY SAY THIS
HYPERCOMPETITIVE ATMOSPHERE IS
THREATENING NOT ONLY THE CAREERS
OF PROMISING SCIENTISTS BUT THE
ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENTIFIC
BREAKTHROUGHS.
>> IT'S VERY STRESSFUL
>> Reporter: QUADRO SAYS THAT
SHE'S CONSTANTLY WORRYING ABOUT
MONEY.
SHE ESTIMATES THAT SHE SPENDS
ABOUT 80% OF HER TIME WORKING ON
GRANTS.
HOW DOES HAVING TO FOCUS ON
GRANT WRITING, HOW HAS THAT
AFFECTED YOUR WORK IN THE LAB.
>> I DON'T WORK IN THE LAB.
I CAN'T BECAUSE I HAVE TO WORK
ON GRANT WRITING MOST OF THE
TIME.
>> PEOPLE WHO COULD BE DOING
EXPERIMENTS ARE INSTEAD WRITING,
REWRITING, SUBMITTING,
RESUBMITTING, TRYING TO GET THAT
GRANT.
AND WHAT A TERRIBLE WASTE OF
TALENT.
>> Reporter: DR. FRANCIS COLLINS
IS THE DIRECTOR OF THE N.I.H.
AND HAS BEEN PUSHING FOR MORE
RESEARCH FUNDING.
>> WHETHER IT'S IN CANCER OR
ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE, BASIC
SCIENCE, CLINICAL APPLICATIONS,
WE'RE AT A REMARKABLE MOMENT
SCIENTIFICALLY.
BUT PARADOXICALLY WE'RE AT ABOUT
THE WORST MOMENT WE'VE BEEN TO
SUPPORT THAT, AT LEAST IN THIS
COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: ONE WOULD THINK
THAT WHEN YOU'RE IN AN
ENVIRONMENT THAT'S THIS
COMPETITIVE FOR DOLLARS, THAT
ONLY THE BEST OF THE BEST
SCIENCE IS GONNA GET FUNDED.
>> TURNS OUT THAT'S NOT TRUE.
CAUSE WE CAN LOOK BACK NOW, CAN
WE ACTUALLY SAY THAT THE TOP
SIXTH WAS BETTER THAN THE NEXT
SIXTH?
TURNS OUT WE CAN'T.
YOU CAN'T TELL THEM APART.
SO WHAT DOES THAT SAY?
THAT SAYS WE'RE LEAVING HALF OF
THE GREAT SCIENCE ON THE TABLE
THAT'S COMING TO US NOW BECAUSE
WE CAN'T FIND THE FUNDS FOR IT.
>> Reporter: DR. COLLINS
RECENTLY TESTIFIED BEFORE A
HOUSE APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE,
ASKING FOR A THREE PERCENT
INCREASE TO THE N.I.H.'S BUDGET,
ENOUGH MONEY FOR 1,200 NEW
GRANTS.
BUT SUBCOMMITTEE CHAIRMAN TOM
COLE WARNED THAT WHILE EVERYONE
SUPPORTED BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH, A
BIG INCREASE TO THE N.I.H. WAS
NOT LIKELY.
>> GIVEN THE REALITY OF FUNDING
ALLOCATIONS, WE MIGHT NOT BE
ABLE TO DO EVERYTHING THAT THE
ADMINISTRATION IS PROPOSING.
>> SCIENCE IS NOT A 100-YARD
DASH.
IT'S A MARATHON.
AND WHAT THAT MEANS IS THAT THE
SCIENCE WE'RE NOT DOING TODAY,
BECAUSE WE DON'T HAVE THE
RESOURCES, IS HURTING OUR FUTURE
10, 15, 20 YEARS FROM NOW IN
WAYS THAT WE DON'T EVEN KNOW.
>> Reporter: WHY SHOULD IT BE,
YOU KNOW, THE GOVERNMENT'S
RESPONSIBILITY TO BE THE PRIMARY
FUNDER FOR BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH?
WHY NOT FOUNDATIONS OR PRIVATE
INDUSTRY?
>> PRIVATE INDUSTRY, FRANKLY, IS
NOT GOING TO DO THAT.
THEIR STOCKHOLDERS ARE EXPECTING
A RETURN ON THAT INVESTMENT, AND
INCREASINGLY EXPECTING THAT
RETURN TO HAPPEN QUICKLY IN A
MATTER OF A COUPLE OF YEARS.
>> Reporter: AND DR. COLLINS
SAYS THAT PHILANTHROPY FUNDS
ONLY A TINY FRACTION OF RESEARCH
COMPARED TO THE N.I.H. AND OFTEN
HAS A NARROW FOCUS ON SPECIFIC
DISEASES.
>> HE LEFT ACADEMIA.
>> Reporter: JUDITH STORCH IS A
COLLEAGUE OF LOREDANA QUADRO'S
AT RUTGERS.
SHE'S BEEN A SCIENTIST FOR MORE
THAN THREE DECADES AND HAS SEEN
THE DRAMATIC CHANGE IN THE
COMPETITION FOR SCIENCE FUNDING
OVER THE YEARS.
ALTHOUGH IT HASN'T BEEN EASY,
SHE'S BEEN CONSISTENTLY FUNDED
DURING HER CAREER.
SHE SAYS HAVING YEARS OF
EXPERIENCE CAN GIVE SENIOR
SCIENTISTS LIKE HER A LEG UP.
>> PART OF THE REASON I THINK
IT'S EASIER FOR A SENIOR
INVESTIGATOR TO GET FUNDED THAN
A JUNIOR INVESTIGATOR IS BECAUSE
WE HAVE A TRACK RECORD.
>> Reporter: AND SOME IN THE
NEXT GENERATION HAVE DECIDED TO
DROP OUT ALTOGETHER.
>> WE HAVE GRADUATE STUDENTS
THAT DECIDE NOT TO FINISH, WE
HAVE GRADUATE STUDENTS WHO
FINISH AND THEN GO AND DO
SOMETHING ENTIRELY DIFFERENT.
BUT PEOPLE ARE OPTING OUT LIKE
CRAZY.
>> Reporter: INCLUDING LESLEY
WASSEF-BIROSIK.
SHE WAS QUADRO'S FIRST
POSTDOCTORAL FELLOW AND CAME TO
THE U.S. FROM AUSTRALIA IN 2006.
BUT AFTER SEVEN AND A HALF YEARS
IN QUADRO'S LAB, SHE DECIDED TO
SWITCH CAREERS.
SHE'S NOW WORKING AS A MEDICAL
WRITER.
>> Reporter: I MEAN, THAT'S A
BIG DECISION, TO CHANGE COURSE
LIKE THAT?
>> YEAH.
IT WAS A TOUGH DECISION.
I THOUGHT I COULD DO IT.
BUT I WAS VERY NAIVE.
I DIDN'T SEE HOW HARD IT WAS TO
GET A GRANT.
AND NO MATTER WHO YOU SPOKE TO,
NO MATTER WHICH LAB YOU SPOKE
TO, EVERYONE WOULD SAY, "IT WAS
TOUGH."
>> WHAT WAKES ME UP AT NIGHT IS
THIS NEXT GENERATION AND WHAT'S
HAPPENING TO THEM.
AND THEY'RE INVARIABLY EXCITED
ABOUT THE SCIENCE THAT THEY'RE
DOING, BUT INVARIABLY ANXIOUS
ABOUT WHERE THERE'S A FUTURE.
>> Reporter: THE ENVIRONMENT FOR
SCIENCE FUNDING HAS LEFT SOME
QUESTIONING WHETHER THE UNITED
STATES WILL REMAIN THE SAME
WORLDWIDE LEADER IN SCIENCE
RESEARCH THAT ATTRACTED LOREDANA
QUADRO AND SO MANY OTHERS HERE.
A RECENT SURVEY OF SCIENTISTS IN
THE U.S. BY ADVOCATES FOR MORE
FUNDING FOUND THAT 18% WERE
CONSIDERING LEAVING THE COUNTRY
TO PURSUE THEIR CAREERS.
>> WE ARE STILL THE LEADER, BUT
NOT BY A LOT.
AND I CAN'T HELP BUT POINT TO
CHINA IN PARTICULAR.
IN ANOTHER FOUR OR FIVE YEARS,
THEY WILL BE SPENDING MORE IN
ABSOLUTE DOLLARS THAN WE ARE.
AND THE CONSEQUENCES ARE ALREADY
APPARENT.
CHINA FILED MORE PATENTS IN
BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH LAST YEAR
THAN THE UNITED STATES DID.
>> Reporter: I MEAN, IF THERE IS
A BIOMEDICAL BREAKTHROUGH IN
CHINA, WON'T I STILL, AS A
CITIZEN HERE, BENEFIT?
>> BUT IT'S THE COUNTRY THAT IS
IN THE LEAD THAT IS GOING TO
HAVE LOTS OF THE MOST IMMEDIATE
CONSEQUENCES.
RESEARCH THAT GOES ON IN THE
U.S. HAS THE HIGHEST LIKELIHOOD
OF INFLUENCING OUR MEDICAL CARE
IN THE SHORT RUN.
IT ALSO IS THE COUNTRY THAT'S
GOING TO HAVE THE GREATEST
ECONOMIC BENEFIT.
>> Reporter: DR. COLLINS POINTS
TO THE HUMAN GENOME PROJECT,
WHICH HE LED BEFORE BECOMING
DIRECTOR OF THE N.I.H.
A STUDY ESTIMATED THAT EACH
DOLLAR INVESTED LED TO $178 IN
ECONOMIC BENEFIT FOR THE U.S.,
INCLUDING JOBS, TAX REVENUES,
AND ADDITIONAL FUNDING FOR
GENOME RESEARCH.
TO HELP SCIENTISTS WITH FUNDING,
THE N.I.H. IS EXPERIMENTING WITH
DIFFERENT MODELS OF FUNDING,
GRANTS SPECIFICALLY GEARED
TOWARDS YOUNGER SCIENTISTS AND
ALLOWING INVESTIGATORS TO RE-
SUBMIT GRANTS MULTIPLE TIMES.
BUT FOR LOREDANA QUADRO, TIME IS
RUNNING OUT.
SHE HAS RECEIVED SOME BRIDGE
FUNDING FROM HER UNIVERSITY AND
CONTINUES TO WORK ON GRANTS,
INCLUDING TO THE N.I.H.
WOULD YOU EVER CONSIDER LEAVING
THIS FIELD?
>> IT'S A VERY DIFFICULT
QUESTION.
IF SOMEBODY DOESN'T GET FUNDED
FOR FIVE YEARS, YOU ARE
AUTOMATICALLY OUT OF THE
PICTURE.
IT WOULD BE VERY TOUGH TO GO
BACK IN.
AND IF THIS HAPPENS, I WILL HAVE
TO MAKE A DECISION.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU CAN HEAR
FROM THE DIRECTOR AT THE
NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH
ABOUT WHY GENETIC RESEARCH IS
KEY TO THE FUTURE OF MEDICINE.
WATCH THE INTERVIEW ON OUR
WEBSITE AT pbs.org/newshour.
IF YOU'VE GOT A COMPANY
SMARTPHONE, THERE'S A CHANCE
YOU'RE BEING TRACKED BY YOUR
BOSSES.
MORE AND MORE COMPANIES ARE
REPORTEDLY USING G.P.S.
TECHNOLOGY TO TRACK EMPLOYEES,
EVEN WHEN THEY'RE OFF THE CLOCK.
ONE WORKER WHO TURNED OFF THE
G.P.S. TRACKER IN HER PHONE GOT
FIRED.
NOW SHE'S TAKING HER EX-
EMPLOYERS TO COURT.
"WASHINGTON POST" REPORTER BRIAN
FUNG JOINS ME NOW WITH MORE ON
THIS FROM WASHINGTON, D.C.
BRIAN FUNG, MANY REPORTERS
FOLLOWING THIS STORY.
FIRST OF ALL GET SOME OF US UP
TO SPEED.
WHAT'S HAPPENED, WHAT IS THE
COMPANY WHAT ARE THEY DOING WHY
SHE'S SUING?
>> THE COMPANY THAT'S INVOLVED
IS INTERMEX, WIRE TRANSFER
SERVICES.
THE WOMAN INVOLVED HER NAME IS
MYRNA ARIAS.
SHE'S SUING HER EMPLOYER BECAUSE
HER EMPLOYER INSTALLED A TYPE OF
SOFTWARE ON HER PHONE THAT WILL
ALLEGEDLY TRACK HER EVEN WHEN
SHE'S NOT ON THE CLOCK.
SO THE EMPLOYEE HERE ARIAS SAID
THIS WAS AN INVASION OF HER
PRIVACY AND SHE DELETED THE APP
AND HER EMPLOYER DECIDED TO FIRE
HER.
IT'S A MATTER FOR THE COURTS TO
DECIDE WHO'S RIGHT HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: THE IDEA OF
TRACKING ISN'T NECESSARILY NEW.
GPS HAS BEEN AROUND FOR A LONG
TIME.
SMARTPHONES AND APPS HAVE BEEN
AROUND FOR A LONG TIME.
WHY IS THIS PIERCING OUR
INTEREST BUBBLE RIGHT NOW?
>> YOU'RE ABSOLUTELY RIGHT.
WE HAVE HAD THIS TECHNOLOGY FOR
A LONG TIME.
EMPLOYERS HAVE LONG TRACKED
PEOPLE THROUGH GPS IN THEIR
CARS.
NOW THAT WE HAVE SMARTPHONES
EVERYWHERE AND THEY ARE SO
UBIQUITOUS, IT IS SO EASY TO
TRACK PEOPLE THROUGH THEIR CELL
PHONES THAN IN THEIR VEHICLES,
WHAT'S HAPPENED HERE IS AN
EXPANSION OF
RACK TECHNOLOGY AND I THINK
SOME PEOPLE ARE REACTING AGAINST
THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE IS ALSO
THIS BALANCE BETWEEN LEGITIMATE
USE CASES VERSUS CIVIL RIGHTS
ABUSES RIGHT?
IF I'M GOING TO A SPECIFIC KIND
OF DOCTOR AND YOU KNOW THE
LOCATION OF THAT DURING THE
LUNCH TIME AND WEEKENDS, THAT
MIGHT BE A VIOLATION OF MY
PRIVACY.
BUT A UPS OR FEDEX EMPLOYEE,
WANT TO MAKE SURE THEY'RE MAKING
THEIR DELIVERIES AS FAST AS THEY
CAN.
>> THAT'S WHY EMPLOYERS HAVE
RACED TO ADOPT THIS TECHNOLOGY,
IN PART, TO SEE THAT EMPLOYEES
ARE WORKING RESPONSIBLY AND
RELIABLY.
BUT MAKING SURE THAT EMPLOYEES
TAKE THEIR MANDATORY WORK
BREAKS, IN ACCORDANCE WITH
CERTAIN STATE LAWS.
SO YOU KNOW, THIS IS ABSOLUTELY
ONE REASON WHY COMPANIES WOULD
BE EAGER TO USE THIS KIND OF
TECHNOLOGY.
ALSO, IT COMES WITH PITFALLS,
WHEN COMPANIES ARE TRACKING
THEIR EMPLOYEES WHEN THEY'RE NOT
WORKING.
AS YOU SAID, THERE'S A LOT OF
CONCERN ABOUT WHAT KIND OF
INFORMATION YOU COULD GLEAN FROM
A PERSON'S BEHAVIOR JUST BY LOOK
AT THEIR LOCATION TRAFFIC.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE A TIME
ANYWHERE THAT WE ARE ACTUALLY
OFF THE CLOCK, JUST BECAUSE WE
HAVE THESE E-MAIL LEASHES BUT
OUR COMPANY FINDS US ANYWHERE WE
ARE.
>> A WAY TO LOOK AT
THIS, EUROPEAN COMPANIES HAVE
INSTITUTED HARD BANS ON E-MAIL
AFTER A CERTAIN PERIOD AFTER
YOUR WORKDAY IS OVER.
AND IN THE UNITED STATES OF
COURSE E-MAIL CAN FIND YOU NO
MATTER WHERE YOU ARE, OR WHAT
TIME OF DAY IT IS.
IT'S JUST A DIFFERENT CULTURE.
BUT, YOU KNOW, THERE IS
CERTAINLY A LOT OF CONSTERNATION
ABOUT BEING AVAILABLE ALL THE
TIME.
PARTICULARLY, YOU KNOW, AS MORE
AND MORE PEOPLE START ADOPTING
SMARTPHONES AND BEING ON MEDIA
24-7.
>> Sreenivasan: BRIAN FUNG
THANKS SO MUCH FOR
JOINING US.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: COMING UP MONDAY
ON THE NEWSHOUR: HEAD START AT
50.
>> IN 1965 I WAS SITTING ON
THE PORCH OF OUR LITTLE SHOTGUN
SHACK IN AMES, TEXAS, AND THE
WOMAN APPROACHED THE HOUSE.
SHE INTRODUCED HERSELF AND TOLD
MY MOTHER THAT SHE WAS
REPRESENTING A NEW PROGRAM
CALLED HEAD START.
>> HIS MOTHER SIGNED HIM UP IN
THE PROGRAM'S INAUGURAL YEAR.
>> IT ALLOWED ME TO THINK ABOUT
THE WORLD OUTSIDE OF MY
ENVIRONMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: THAT'S TOMORROW
ON THE NEWSHOUR.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, THANKS FOR
WATCHING.